# First step: compile your source code (.cpp) using a compiler

First, the compiler checks your C++ code to make sure it follows the rules of the C++ language. If it does not, the compiler will give you an error (and the corresponding line number) to help pinpoint what needs fixing. The compilation process will also be aborted until the error is fixed.

Second, the compiler translates your C++ code into machine language instructions. These instructions are stored in an intermediate file called an object file. The object file also contains other data that is required or useful in subsequent steps (including data needed by the linker, and for debugging).

Object files are typically named name.o or name.obj, where name is the same name as the .cpp file it was produced from.

C++ compilers are available for many different operating systems.


# Second step: Linking object files and libraries and creating the output file

After the compiler has successfully finished, another program called the linker kicks in. The linker’s job is to combine all of the object files and produce the desired output file (such as an executable file that you can run). This process is called linking. If any step in the linking process fails, the linker will generate an error message describing the issue and then abort.

First, the linker reads in each of the object files generated by the compiler and makes sure they are valid.

Second, the linker ensures all cross-file dependencies are resolved properly. For example, if you define something in one .cpp file, and then use it in a different .cpp file, the linker connects the two together. If the linker is unable to connect a reference to something with its definition, you’ll get a linker error, and the linking process will abort.

Third, the linker typically links in one or more library files, which are collections of precompiled code that have been “packaged up” for reuse in other programs.

Finally, the linker outputs the desired output file. Typically this will be an executable file that can be launched (but it could be a library file if that’s how you’ve set up your project).